<L>1507<pc>179-a<k1>caturTIvrata<k2>caturTIvrata
CATURTHĪVRATA¦. A fast undertaken so that one
may be happy for one year, may achieve all desires and
attain Śivaloka. While observing this fast one should
worship Gaṇapati on the fourth day after New Moon
(Caturthī) in the month of Makara (February-March).
Next day the fast should be broken by eating cooked
rice and oil seeds. The Mūlamantra of Gaṇapati is
‘gaṃ svāhā’; hṛdayādiṣaḍaṅgas beginning with ‘gam’.
‘Āgacchātikāya’ is the āvāhana mantra and ‘Gacchā-
tikāya’ the visarjana mantra. Gaṇapati should be
worshipped with mantras ending with ‘tuṅkāya’ and
beginning with ‘gakāra’ as also with offering of sandal
paste, rice balls etc. “Oṃ Mahotkāyāya vidmahe vakra-
tuṇḍāya dhīmahi tanno dantī pracodayāt” is the Gaṇeśa
gāyatrī mantra. He or she who performs the Caturthī
vrata will attain Śivaloka. If Gaṇapati is worshipped
on a Tuesday which is also Caturthī the devotee will
get all his desires satisfied. Caturthī occurring in Mīna
(March-April) is called Avighnacaturthī, and that day
fasting should be in the night. On Caturthī in April-
May Gaṇapati should be worshipped with damanaka
[Page179-b+ 65]
flowers, and then the worshipper will become very
happy. (Agni Purāṇa, Chapter 179). Also see Vināyaka
Caturthī.
<LEND>
