<L>1537<pc>182-b<k1>ciradAtA<k2>ciradAtA
CIRADĀTĀ¦. There was a king called Ciradātā in the
country called Cirapura. Though himself a good man he
was surrounded by bad advisers. Once a foreigner,
Prasaṅga, came along with two friends to the palace to
see the King. But due to the bad advice of his courtiers
the King did not care to see them even. For five years
they stayed there without even getting a look at the
King. One day the only son of the King died. All the
courtiers gathered round the child and pretended to
be greatly grieved. Prasaṅga and his friends also came
to the scene. They saw the king and spoke to him thus:
“For five years you have not cared either to see or talk to
us. We were cherishing a hope that at least your son
would give us a better treatment when he grew old and
became King. We were living here on that hope and now
that hope also has been shattered and so we are leaving
the place this instant.” The King was surprised to hear
that they were prepared even to wait for his son to
become the King and gave them very many presents.
(Taraṅga 5, Alaṅkāravatī Laṃbaka, Kathāsaritsāgara).
<LEND>
