<L>2556<pc>306-a<k1>hAlAhala<k2>hAlAhala
HĀLĀHALA¦(S) A sect of asuras, who were the first
creation of the Trimūrtis, when they also possessed the
power of creation. The Hālāhalas, who became very
powerful within a short period of time earned from
Brahmā all the boons they wanted, and they then
conquered the three worlds. At last they barricaded
Kailāsa and Vaikuṇṭha also, and Hariharas (Viṣṇu and
Śiva) defeated them after a fierce fight lasting for a
thousand years. The Hariharas returned to their abodes
and spoke about their achievements. Their wives laugh-
ed at the bravado of their husbands. At this Mahā-
viṣṇu got angry with Lakṣmī and Śiva with Pārvatī,
and in protest the Devīs left their husbands. From
that day onwards Viṣṇu and Śiva began losing their
power. Brahmā, who divined the reason for the growing
weakness of Viṣṇu and Śiva persuaded Lakṣmī and
Pārvatī to return to their husbands so that they might
regain their former power. Yet, Brahmā told them that
in future he alone would handle the work of creation.
Thus was Viṣṇu and Śiva divested of their right to
creation. (Devī Bhāgavata, 7th Skandha).
<LEND>
