<L>6938<pc>752-b<k1>sudeva<k2>sudeva<h>II
SUDEVA II¦. A captain of the army of King Ambarīṣa.
He was calm and fearless. Sudeva met with a heroic
death in a battle and attained heaven. Indra gave him
a suitable place. Later Ambarīṣa died and came to
heaven. There he saw his captain Sudeva and was
amazed. He asked Indra how it was that Sudeva was
given a place in heaven. Indra replied that to fight
fearlessly in the battle-field and meet with heroic death,
was a yajña (sacrifice) and that due to this yajña
Sudeva attained heaven. The King asked, when this
[Page753-a+ 65]
took place. Indra continued:—“Once Ambarīṣa sent
Sudeva to subdue the asuras and giants. Sudeva enter-
ed the battlefield and looked at the vast army of the
enemy. Finding that it was impossible to defeat the
army of giants, he sat down and meditated on Śiva,
who appeared before him and encouraged him. A fierce
battle followed in which Sudeva annihilated the army
of the giants completely and he himself met with a
heroic death. That is how he obtained heaven. (M.B.
Dākṣiṇātyapāṭha, Śānti Parva, Chapter 98).
<LEND>
