<L>49454<pc>1064-a<k1>sapiRqa<k2>sapiRqa
{#sapiRqa#}¦ {%sa-piṇḍa, as,%} m. ‘having the same
Piṇḍa,’ a kinsman connected by the offering of the
funeral cake to the Manes of certain relations (viz.
father, grandfather, great-grandfather, &c., including
the direct descendants of four persons, or, according to
others, seven persons in an ascending and descending
line: the following are therefore called Sapiṇḍas — 
son, son's son, and son's grandson; widow, daughter,
and daughter's son; father, mother, brother, brother's
son, brother's grandson; father's daughter's son;
father's brother's son and grandson; paternal grand-
father's daughter's son; paternal grandfather; paternal
grandmother, paternal grandfather's brother, brother's
son and grandson; great grandfather's daughter's
son). {%—Sapiṇḍa-tā,%} f. the condition of being a Sa-
piṇḍa. {%—Sapiṇḍī-karaṇa, am,%} n. investing a person
with the rights of a Sapiṇḍa or kinsman (as described
above); performing the Śrāddha to deceased relatives
called Sapiṇḍas (at the end of a full year after the
death of a relative). {%—Sapiṇḍī-kṛta, as, ā, am,%}
invested with the relationship of Sapiṇḍa.
<LEND>
