<L>51470<pc>1097-b<k1>savitf<k2>savitf
{%Savitṛ, tā, trī, tṛ,%}¦ generating, vivifying, pro-
ducing, causing, effecting; ({%tā%}), m. a generator,
vivifier; the sun, (in the Veda sometimes identified
with and sometimes distinguished from Sūrya, q. v.;
according to Sāy. the sun before rising is called
Savitṛ, and after rising till its setting Sūrya; many
hymns of the Ṛg-veda are devoted to the praise of
Savitṛ, e. g. 1. 35, II. 38, III. 62, 10-12, IV. 53,
54, V. 81, 82, &c.; he is described as ‘golden-
eyed,’ ‘golden-handed,’ ‘golden-armed,’ ‘golden-
tongued,’ ‘yellow-haired,’ &c., the waters and the
winds are said to obey him, and the other gods are
described as following his lead and bowing to his
authority; he is also, like Agni, called Apāṃ napāt,
‘son of the waters,’ and is even worshipped as a
‘lord of all creatures,’ supporting the world and de-
livering his votaries from sin; the celebrated verse
called {%gāyatrī%} and {%sāvitrī,%} q. q. v. v., is addressed to
him); epithet of Indra; of Śiva; N. of one of the
twenty-eight Vyāsas; a particular plant or tree
{%(= arka); (trī),%} f. a mother; a cow. {%—Savitṛ-%}
{%daivata, as,%} m. ‘having the sun for a deity,’ the
constellation Hastā or the thirteenth of the lunar
asterisms (so called because the sun is the ruling
deity of this asterism).
<LEND>
